welcome back everyone thanks for tuning
into the China history podcast Lhasa
Montgomery here for the 239th time for
the past eight episodes and for the
ninth one today we've been looking at
the warlord era in China that began in
part one with the death of you and shirk
I in June of 1916 and in this episode
the penultimate one I guess you could
call it will almost but not quite finish
things off as we continue on with the
northern expedition the big military
campaign that was gonna once and for all
put an end to the Warlord's and let
China for the first time since the fall
of the Ching to get a chance to take a
breather and regroup after a very rough
half century wishful thinking back then
we left off last episode in the
afterglow of the Shanghai massacre this
was in April 1927 if you recall from so
many past episodes and series this was
also when the Chinese Communist Party
and the ones who survived at that is
scattered in all directions in Mao
Zedong and his followers had made their
way to Jing Gong Chan in Jiang Shi and
started to create a bit of CCP history
there and for the half year leading up
to the Shanghai massacre the labor and
peasant movement had advanced greatly
thanks to a number of factors CCP
organizing help from the Comintern
reforms had followed in the wake of the
first phase of the northern expedition
and from the KMT left as well so that
problem was dealt with for the time
being from about the on wage early war
in July 1922 the - surely from ten Wars
of 1922 and 1924 followed by the anti
funky n war of 1925 1926 and all these
other Wars mini Wars Jang Soota Chang
Guangdong Guangxi you nan Guang XI
remember when I said at the outset would
a terribly complicated period this was
well from the moment your insurer Chi
died in June 1916 it was
time of non-stop war battles and
skirmishes alliances broken alliances
the world at war government and disarray
the CCP on the rise Soviets trying to
control the narrative the suffering of
the entire Chinese populace would go
along on this ride this this warlord era
it really was a rough dozen or so years
before it finally ended and was replaced
by something even more horrific I've
left out quite a bit of history from
this whole warlord era it's it's a lot
of the same thing I've mentioned most of
the important events and some of the
major names but this dive could go much
deeper than I'm taking it and being the
betting man that I've always been I'm
thinking most you will be pretty much
satisfied with the headlines the main
thing I guess I wanted to convey was the
destructiveness of these years not only
to the land the infrastructure and the
people's livelihood but to China's
standing in the world because of these
warlords and all the political paralysis
caused China sorta boxed itself into a
corner and made it easy for other
nations to take advantage of the
situation and you know get rich off the
fat of the land and as we head deeper
into 1927 1928 and even into 1929 in
1930 you'll see these warlords become
like zombies that refused to die during
the northern expedition with every
victory of the NRA you keep getting the
feeling this nightmare is over
at last and then it's not over they're
back
you know when John went Nord at the
Shanghai Massacre it was shocking it
created what turned out to be a rift
between the leftist and rightist
elements of the KMT that could never be
truly reconciled and of course as far as
the KMT CCP relations Zhang kai-shek
going and doing what he did pretty much
threw down the gauntlet
the CCP understandably with some total
disarray trying to bounce back from the
Shanghai massacre and the so-called
white terror they had been taken by
surprised and needed time to regroup and
get back into the game later at this
point they were following the advice of
their Soviet comrades and not yet taking
control of their own destiny that will
come soon in the meantime Stalin and
Trotsky were having their epic struggle
up in Russia and both had opposite
points of view as far as which road
the CCP should take in China the KMT
left and KMT right went at each other
one Qing way called for Jiang's austere
and stripped him of all offices and
commands Jian countered by setting up a
new government to Nanjing on April 18th
1927 Stalin's famous rambling telegram
of early June 1927 did a lot to
complicate matters
I mentioned it last episode and once
Wang Jingwei got to read a copy of what
Stalin was suggesting that the CCP do
yeah he knew KMT left was just a pawn
being used by the CCP and their Soviet
masters against the KMT right so Wang
had managed to alienate himself from
John and the KMT right and Nanjing and
now he knew the ones he trusted all this
time
yeah we're secretly plotting against his
interests so what to do now the two
competing factions of the KMT decided
not as one fighting force but separately
instead to resume the fight against
Chang Tholian and his national
pacification army allies and the KMT
left they had the Honan warlord Tung
Chung sure as their main military backer
they decided to take the fight to Jang
meet up with fungus Jung along the way
bring him over to their side finish off
chunks or Lin and his minions and then
once this was all taken care of they
plan to go after Chiang kai-shek and get
rid of him well that was the plan anyway
this Wuhan coalition led by Tung Chung
chair and his army had marched north
east along the Peking Hanako railway
line
towards the city of Changjo all
throughout May 1927 whenever they
encountered chunks or liens troops they
kept pushing him back all was going well
so far
the Wuhan troops and fun.you Shang's
troops who had marched from Shaanxi all
converged on the ancient city of Jeong
Joe about the same time fungus Yong set
up his headquarters there Chinese
civilization had been alive and well in
that city in Hunan province going all
the way back to the Shang Kings of the
16th century BCE more than 30 centuries
before fungus Jung added to the city's
considerable historical legacy Jeong Jo
was the last major stop in the rail line
that branched out all over northern
China and now this key transport and
railway hub was controlled by fungus
Jung that's why in June 1927 both
factions of the KMT the left and the
right were actively courting fungus Jung
trying to win him over to their side
negotiators from Wang Jingwei and Chiang
kai-shek were holding secret meetings
with fung making all kinds of promises
and offering attractive cash bribes in a
June 19th 1927 two months after the
shanghai massacre Chiang kai-shek had
his turn to personally meet face to face
with fung yu-sau
their first encounter fung had just left
a meeting the other day with Wang Ching
ways people to see what they had to
offer him and now it was time to see
what promises and financial incentives
Jung and the KMT right would make
whoever offered the best deal
that's who fung you shang went with
basic warlord theory 101 there's a story
about how when Jean kai-shek went up to
shoot Joe Chen su province to wait for
the Christian warlord funds train pulled
up and he walked out of a boxcar dressed
like a common soldier and announced
himself to a very surprised young who
was you know expecting someone a little
more professional and dignified looking
this was later called a big setup
and that funk had actually rode and were
comfortably appointed rooms and that
before the train got to the station and
shoot Joe Fung switched train cars and
changed into more humble soldiers garb
he carried out the same ruse with one
gene way I read so fungus Jung had grown
disillusioned with the Soviets after his
short stint there following the anti
funky n war and had enough sense of
patriotism to see what they had in mind
as far as which direction they'd like to
see China go so that's one reason he
ended up shaking hands with Chiang
kai-shek at this meeting in the
Generalissimo saw to it that after they
had both come to a general understanding
a two million dollar per month cherry on
top of everything else was promised john
kai-shek the closer so fungus Jung this
time around June 1927 was gonna fight
down the side of the Nationalists and he
made his intentions known in the form of
a telegram sent to the Wuhan government
in which he suggested three things first
get rid of all the Communists and Soviet
advisers second was to go join the
Nanjing government and lastly he
suggested some leaders in the faction go
take a nice extended European vacation
and that my friends was pretty much the
end of the Wuhan left-leaning KMT
government the Soviets knew that jig was
up and packed up and started heading
home and one jingwei took the betraying
general up on that European holiday idea
and once he declared his loyalties to
Jung and the NRA fungus Jung carried out
a purge in his own ranks two of all
communists this included his illustrious
political commissar at the time mister
dunne Xiao ping he had to make a quick
exit there not long after dung will run
into Mao Zedong in Wuhan his first
meeting with the future great helmsman
we all know what happens after that also
mentioned so many times and past
episodes communist operatives everywhere
throughout 1927 and into 1928 were
hunted down and killed or driven
underground until it was safe to come
out the KMT and the two armies
controlled by the Wuhan faction and the
nan Jiang faction couldn't fight as one
too much bad blood out there and
consequently Jiang Saleem and his forces
led primarily by lid augment all Jung
Hong Kong and the Nanking warlord swin
chuan Fung they fought hard took back
all the territory they they had lost to
the NRA during the summer of 1927 and
after suffering a major drubbing at the
hands of Swinton Fong's forces around
nanjing john kai-shek was back on his
heels a poor result on the battlefield
and getting outmaneuvered by his fellow
rivals and the KMT forced young in
August 1927 to step down and he removed
himself from the action it had been four
months since the shanghai massacre and
the blowback from that and junks
inability to finish off the northern
expedition caused Jang to make a
political tactical withdrawal it ended
up taking the combined efforts of Lee
Seong Ren clinging chin and fungus
Chang's armies to finally defeat Swint
Ron Fung in September 1927
this allowed NRA troops to catch
somewhat of a breather with Sun out of
the way that had been an exhausting
string of battles he had been a menace
to not only his enemies but well society
as well all throughout 1925 26 and 27
his troops saw a lot of action and
wherever there was action innocent
civilians lost their lives or had them
turned upside down so August 1927 Chiang
kai-shek retreated to his hometown of
Chicot where he began a self-imposed
five-month exile shikoh is located just
a little south west of Ningbo which is
why john kai-shek is considered a Ningpo
Ren and they're in Chico John waited
things out if you ever find your
and ink ball with nothing to do go visit
this place quite historic Chico is where
Jung stashed jung jae-young
after the xian incident in 1936 the
villa he shared with some mei-ling is
also there in chico the mei-ling Kong
and speaking of so mei-ling as this
drama is all playing out Jung in the
summer of 1927 asked for her hand in
marriage and this time she accepted back
in 1922 when he met her at a party at
Sun yat-sen's house he was a relative
nobody compared to someone the likes of
so mei-ling
but not anymore in 1922 she looked down
on him as too common and rough around
the edges but now despite the political
circumstances of the moment he was
arguably the leading military and
political figure at a time when there
were a lot of powerful military and
political figures operating on the stage
of Chinese history so it wasn't such a
great catch five years ago and all the
sudden wasn't looking so bad hitching
her carriage to Chiang kai-shek wasn't a
bad deal for some mei-ling nor for the
whole song family clan and for Jung I
might add and if you remember from that
old whitey Smith episode CHP 193 on
December 1st 1927 40 year old young
kai-shek and 26 year old some Mei Ling
were Wed and that most gala event of the
year was held that same evening in the
Majestic Hotel with whitey in all his
glory the great show man up on the
bandstand
what a night by the end of 1927 things
within the kmt were sufficiently in
enough disarray that it was felt in some
circles that may be bringing back john
wasn't such a bad idea and so on January
1st 1928 with the KMT now unified or
more unified than usual Chiang kai-shek
was handed the leadership of the party
and then in February 18th he was made
commander in chief of the northern
expeditionary forces with Hoang Chien
serving as his deputy
this second phase of the northern
expedition that had languished for
almost a year
was gonna once and for all bring down
Chung toh lien that was the plan anyway
to do this four armies were organized
the first Army or central army based in
Nanjing well they were led by Chung and
were chock-full of Whampoa Military
Academy officers and soldiers the second
army was essentially fungus young as Gua
mean June or National People's Army the
third was the army of the Shaanxi
warlord Yin Shi Xiong and the fourth
army was led by Li Tong Ren and his
Guang XI army warlords fighting warlords
what else is new ant young side all
warlord armies combined they had about
700 thousand troops fighting against
about four hundred thousand warlord
troops on the other side and so on April
9th 1928 almost a year to the day that
young Kicked the hornets nest and
unleashed the Shanghai massacre and
white terror the northern expedition was
launched again last time the Japanese
Kwantung army stopped him before the NRA
was able to march into Shandong and he
was planning to do it now whether they
liked it or not and his army headed in
the direction of Shandong the land of
the two great and ancient states of Qi
and Luo Zhang Kai shek knew there was
gonna be some kind of reaction from
Japan so let's wait and see
and over in Shaanxi province the model
governor Yin Shi Shan leading his own
army the third of the four northern
expedition armies he had decided now it
was best for him to have moved his chips
over to the Zhang Kai shek side all this
time zhang chao lin had been making
overtures to Yin Shi Shan to have him to
clear his loyalties to the funk inside
yes Yin Shi Shan always did he weighed
his options considered the merits and
benefits and decided on what was best
for him
and what was best for Yin Shi Shan at
least while he was in charge
was always best for Shaanxi province so
with John's army on the march heading in
the direction of the Shandong capital
the Japanese officials in Jinan called
their big strong buddies in the Kwantung
army and said something's about to go
down and it won't be good for Team Japan
the 2,000 or so Japanese nationals and
Jinan we're gonna need some protection
so they told the guangdong army better
send about 3,000 troops or so only a few
weeks into the relaunch of the northern
expedition the first and second armies
were camped outside jinan Jian kai-shek
showed up in early May 1928 and at once
started negotiating with the Japanese to
persuade them to leave Jinan and allow
the NRA to come in and reestablish
political and administrative control
over the city you know it worked in
ancient times if you set your mind to
something all you need is an incident to
point to to justify some extreme action
that you're looking to take and just as
Jung thought taken back g9 was gonna be
easy what followed Jung's attempted
takeover of Chi nan is written into the
Chinese history books as the jinan
incident the Wu San Tong on May 3rd 1928
it worked so well for Japan they did it
again on JoePa 1918 1931 in trying to
gingerly establish control of the city a
bunch of Japanese got roughed up a
couple dozen or so killed and before you
could say casus belli the Japanese
military on May 8th 1928 launched an
all-out attack on the city of Jinan five
thousand Chinese killed it was a rump
Japan then held Jena and close to their
chest until they were forced to let it
go in March 1929 not surprisingly and
you could take deeper if you want to
like a lot of these incidents that
happened in China between the Japanese
and Chinese the CCP and the KMT the CCP
in the USA and so on and so forth
whoever had a horse in that race
there's always
more than one version supported by the
different groups involved in any case
Zhang kai-shek cut his losses and moved
on to the big prize the final
destination the Gyeonggi engine of the
campaign the last stop the city of
Beijing were junk so Lin awaited but his
Jung's Diaries reveal and he was most
prolific about recording his thoughts
and his private Diaries from here on out
he will know Japan's greatest enemy
without was Japan and it could never be
trusted his attitudes towards Japan were
very much impacted by the outcome of
this jinan incident he never forgot it
and not just John the whole military
establishment didn't need to have the
outcome explained to them and Chinese
civilians who knew what was going on
their attitudes towards Japan hardened
as well the northern expedition combined
forces began pushing the dog meet
general Chang Chong Chong and the young
marshal Zhang Xiao Liang back north to
their particular strongholds as for will
pay foo fighting on the side of junks or
lien against the NRA the two could not
hold back Jiang's forces and decided to
make a retreat to Sichuan province and
finally get out of the warlord business
jong-hong Chang was soundly defeated and
went back to his home province of
Shandong the very province that he had
ruled as his own personal Kingdom and
cash cow he's gonna make a grab to get
back to those glory days but we'll look
at that next episode the Japanese liked
everything the way it was in Manchuria
with Jung Zola in charge of things the
old Marshall Lee didn't see eye to eye
on everything with the Japanese but with
him in charge well they were given a
rather free hand to go kick the tires
all over North China and shop for some
new acquisitions the Mukden incident was
still four years away and the Marco Polo
Bridge incident a decade away but by the
late 1920s the anti-japanese feeling all
over China was very palpable incidents
happened all the time
Japanese nationals
often got hurt or roughed up by the
locals and now Japanese troops and
weapons were pouring into China under
the pretense of protecting Japanese
citizens and interests in China more and
more Japanese naval vessels were plying
China's coast and great rivers and
because he didn't do anything about this
as it was happening before everyone's
eyes john kai-shek ended up getting
heaps of criticism from every corner for
putting up with us japanese arrogance
and aggression and not taking the fight
to them when they were so disrespecting
china he appeased the Japanese too
easily his critics said Jiang secretly
knew after these warlords were dealt
with once and for all
he'd have to deal with Japan next in one
form or another he didn't want to take
on both at the same time by May 1928
Jiang's first and second armies were
advancing on Beijing junk so Lin was
still in control of the capital but he
knew things weren't looking good
former frenemy yan xishan was advancing
from the west now fighting on john
kai-shek side against him the old
Marshall knew his son so as well as
anyone and he knew when the right time
was to make a tactical retreat two
months into the campaign the NRA had
taken Beijing and John saw a link did
something he didn't do too often when
Japan had threatened everyone to keep
their fighting out of Manchuria or else
the old martial they didn't like that
told them where to stick it
there's something about Jiang soil in
the Japanese were starting to have
second thoughts about how pliable their
old friend was going to be as far as
bending to their demands so June 3rd
1928 junk soil in along with his
entourage boarded his private train
pulled out a Beijing station and headed
in the direction of Shenyang then in the
early hours of the morning of June 4th
1928 just as his train was approaching
Northwest Shenyang at Hong Kuen station
bombs were set off on a bridge
that junk tolling strained carriage was
passing under it collapsed and killed
the Manchurian warlord not instantly but
he perished before lunchtime
this was known as the Huang coot one
sure gen the Wan GU to an incident
blowing up junks Orleans train was an
utter and complete disaster for Japan it
was terribly bungled by rogue elements
inside the Guangdong army who took it
upon themselves to deal drastically with
this Manchurian warlord who was mouthing
off to them talking to the Soviets
talking to the Americans
so the conspirators meant for this to be
the Mukden incident that would create
the wherewithal for Japan to take over
Manchuria but instead right at the
outset things didn't go according to
plan it failed in its main objective
even Emperor Hirohito gave the ones
responsible a written tongue lashing the
Hawks in the Kwantung army had to wait
till 9 18 1931 to finally get their
Mukden incident and the upshot to all
this that perhaps most of all
contributed to making this a disaster
for Japan and Manchuria was that jung
jae-young on June 19th 1928 called
Chiang kai-shek and let him know he too
was joining the NRA side the Japanese
bumped off the old marshal because he
was dragging his heels on a lot of what
the guangdong military was asking for
they wrongly predicted that Jung tollens
drug addict playboy son of the young
marshal Zhang Xiao Liang would be a less
pugnacious warlord to deal with but they
misjudged him Zhang Xiao Liang didn't
require too many brain cells to see what
Japan's Guandong army was up to and he
knew he didn't have enough muscle power
to take Japan on alone but the young
marshal knew he could really throw a
wrench in their plans by joining up with
the Nationalist government and throwing
his lot and with junk Ishak watching
jong-il Yang's army raised the
nationalist flag and Manchuria was just
about the last thing Japan wanted to see
happen and he should have thought twice
before they went and blow
John Collins train this was a stunning
reversal of fortune for Japan
so with Chung toh leaned out of the way
in Changsha Lian now on his side Zhang
Kai shek army took Beijing on July 6
1928 and that was the official end of
the northern expedition or was it we'll
see what happened next in the conclusion
of this warlord series Matt Chien and
Holly huh just came out with a new
podcast that I'd like to give you a
rock-solid recommendation to Heartland
mainland the Iowa China podcast you know
you could learn a lot about the us-china
relationship driving around the Hawkeye
State the state next door from where I
grew up that's what Matt and Holly did
and from the teaser and first episode I
can't recommend this podcast enough new
from Matt Sheehan yeah that's right the
China fornia guide the trans-pacific
experiment guy fellow at the Paulson
Institute headquartered in my hometown
Chicago Illinois Matt and Holly both
part of that think tank at the Paulson
Institute Heartland mainland the Iowa
China podcast wherever podcasts are sold
and may I also shamelessly plug the new
children's book for my good friend you
ciao ciao
little Sens Chinese holidays great book
for your three to eight year old it's
never too early to learn all the
traditional Chinese holidays the values
the special foods treats customs all the
basic stuff in English and simplified
Chinese it's a great little book
beautifully illustrated and it breaks
down all the holidays and allows your
precious one to learn all about these
Chinese festivals little Suns Chinese
holidays new from you chow chow and
shiny lantern press all the links will
be in the show notes for this episode at
the official CHP website a teacup dot
media hey and use a special discount
code CHP get 20% off and last but not
least again you have nothing to fear
except fear itself if you'd like to
support the CHP and all the conscripted
laborers I have to use to help me get
this thing out on time every two weeks
go to
/ China history podcast or for something
quick and easy find my begging bowl at
PayPal dot me slash China history
podcast that's gonna be it for this time
ladies and gentlemen's Laszlo Montgomery
signing off from Los Angeles California
hoping and praying you'll find it in
your heart to come back one more time
for another exciting episode on the
China history podcast not to mention the
conclusion to this series take care
everyone